what gets really interesting and this is
something
most scientists don't even know about
yet is level three the deep layer of
aging
there's actually a dna clock that tells
our bodies how old we are we i could
take your blood and read it
and i could tell you roughly when you're
going to die
everyone welcome to health theory
today's guest is david sinclair he's an
acclaimed harvard professor who's doing
some of the world's most ground-breaking
work on human longevity he was named by
time magazine as one of the most
influential people on the planet and his
new book lifespan the revolutionary
science of why we age and why we don't
have to is set to permanently shift how
we think about the inevitability of
aging and possibly even death
that is exactly where i want to start so
this is my favorite topic i want to live
forever i make no bones about it i know
that right now though i'm on a collision
course with death
so you have a really interesting theory
about what makes us age that if i'm not
mistaken you call the information
theory of aging so what exactly is the
information theory of aging and how do
we
take advantage of it so aging actually
has been worked on for about 5 000 years
or more
and just in the last 20 years we've come
up
with a set of hallmarks of aging there
are about eight of them and i think many
of your viewers will know that there's
telomere attrition the ends of
chromosomes get shorter mitochondria the
power packs will run out of energy as we
get older there's a list a long laundry
list and most of the people in in my
field have said okay we've we've figured
out aging we've got this list we put in
a nice pie chart and that's it but what
i'm saying is that
why does all that stuff happen it's not
enough just to tick off what happens you
have to understand is there an upstream
cause of all of that and so in my book
and in scientific papers we are now
putting out for the scientific community
to read as well
what we think is going on is that
our bodies are losing essential
information as we get older that drives
many if not all of those hallmarks that
we know exist
so what
in what way is the epigenome involved in
this how are we losing the information
give people a quick little diatribe
about the difference between genetics
which i think they get and then the
epigenome and epigenetics and and how
that plays out yeah yeah for sure it's
not that complicated there's really just
two main types of information in our
body that we get from our parents the
first is genetic we all know about dna
and the four letters atcg
it's a long molecule in cell and it's a
string of letters that's digital that's
like the music that's on on a dvd those
things we used to use uh to store movies
but there's another level of information
that's above that in the cells which is
the reader of the information that's
called the epigenome
and that really is different because
it's analog information
in the same way that
records and cassette tapes
they sucked they were terrible at
storing information
but the problem is we have an analog
version of information the epigenome
which controls which genes in the string
of dna are turned on and off and that's
why are you considering that analog i
don't think i understand how it actually
works like i can imagine dna sequences
as just sort of repeating the atcg
code but what is analog about the
epigenome this
reading about it in your book is the
first time that
i began to imagine it in a different way
well it's very clear that that if you
just have four letters that's digital so
we understand that but the epigenome
is
the structure of how the dna is
organized so dna isn't just flailing
around like a string it's actually
packaged up around proteins we call
histones and it's like if you spool your
hose in the garden you loop it around
and then you can put those loops into
bigger structures then you get a
chromosome which you can see
any high school student can see under a
microscope that's that chromatin
structure as we call it
is the epigenome and so when when the
hose is looped tightly and spooled up
that's stopping genes from being red so
genes are off when they're compacted but
also if the cell needs to read certain
genes and a nerve cell needs to read the
nerve cell genes and the liver cell
needs to read specifically the liver
cell genes and so they open those ones
up and now the cell can get access and
read those that's an analog system
because it it's varying all the time it
changes when you wake up what you eat so
it is literally the amount that the um
the dna is unspooled and the place in
which it is unspooled so that it can be
read
right and that's what determines the
cell's function and identity which we
you know when we're born where 26
billion cells each one of those cells
knows what it is and what it has to be
80 years later it and its descendants
and over time what i'm saying is aging
is caused because cells lose their
packaging and then eventually cells lose
their identity disease ensure ensues
cells check out they become zombie-like
and they're now in essence right
senescence and then our organs fail and
we die
but until recently we had no idea why
that was happening
and so why is it happening
well so the the packaging is the really
important part because much like the
software runs the code the epigenome
controls which genes are on and off
and if you stress the system and by that
i mean biological stress and the biggest
stress you can cause to a cell is to
break its chromosome because it's going
to die if that if it doesn't fix it or
worse
for the body you get a tumor so the cell
has to hunker down stop dividing arrest
just about everything it's doing
and then try to repair that broken dna
but in doing so it has to do two things
first of all it has to take proteins
from somewhere else that are doing a
good job
keeping the cell from functioning or
making sure the cell's functioning
correctly and those proteins are used by
the cell to repair the dna that's broken
but also what's happening at the break
is that that's all opening up as well
because you remember if you break a dna
and it's spooled up you can't fix it you
can't glue it back together unless you
unpack it
stick it back together and then you've
got to repack it
so this movement of proteins and the
unpacking repacking of the dna
i believe leads to cells losing that
original youthful what we call a gene
expression pattern of how the genes are
turned on and off and nerve cells as
they get older lose their ability to
stay nerve cells and liver cells lose
their identity as liver cells
all right so
do proteins the way that you're talking
about them sound like little creatures i
think of them because of my background
like powder like just sort of inert
molecules which clearly judging by the
way that you're talking about them
they're not i've seen them animated
before as having like articulatable
shapes and they actually move
is that accurate
that's essentially it it's it's super
exciting when you realize that proteins
aren't just blobs or powders in the cell
they're actually little little machines
like pac-man that go around and they can
change the function of other things they
can package the dna
and what they they do is they create
chemical reactions that normally would
take a billion years to happen
this is what an enzyme does it
accelerates reactions and so we've got
about 20 000 different types of enzymes
in the body
and they do different things but what
we've discovered over the last 20 years
is there are certain types of enzymes
that help package the dna
and help with the dna repair these are
the ones that doing the ping pong game
and without those
we're screwed we basically will will age
more rapidly
conversely what's really exciting is
we've discovered that you can make them
more active to make sure the dna is
packaged correctly and the repair is
very efficient and
there are ways you can do that exercise
dieting being hungry
they allow these enzymes that control
our body and make us healthier they make
those enzymes much more active so
instead of a pacman doing this
you exercise your diet
take them take a molecule that we work
on and it'll go around and fix
everything much more efficiently and
keep you younger for longer we think why
do you use the pacman analogy which
makes me think of it's eating something
is that what's happening is it eating
cells that have a level of senescence or
is it uh more bob the builder and it's
going around tearing some things apart
putting some things back together yeah
it's more like bob the builder but i
think a good example for at least the
enzymes that we work on called
serotonins that protect the body
they're like a little tiny pair of
scissors they they chip up clip off
chemicals
called acetyls and in doing so when they
clip off the acetyls off those packaging
proteins the dna gets more compact and
that's called gene silencing
and over time
as we get older and through this dna
damage process
the sirtuins get inactive they're
distracted by dna repair and the
packaging of that dna that that hose
spooling
starts to loosen and now genes that have
no business being on in the brain
come on
and partly i believe that's why we we
have these diseases of the brain
[__] that's so interesting um okay so
one i want to know from a lifestyle
perspective what are we doing that's
speeding that up and then two
what can we
do from a lifestyle perspective to begin
slowing that down and reversing it
well so i've been studying these enzymes
the sirtuins we have seven in our bodies
i've been studying them for about 25
years
and what we've learned is that they
respond to the cellular
environment there's a chemical that they
require for gas think of them as the
fuel called nad and there's another
molecule that is like the accelerator on
the enzymes uh that makes them going
even faster and that's one of them is
called resveratrol which we discovered
years ago from red wine and together
they actually do really great things on
these enzymes and make them keep the
body younger at least for 25 years we've
been studying mostly
animals
and even little fungi
yi cells and what we've learned from
those studies is that
these are largely
involved in responding to when organisms
are under threat of survival
so how do you make the body feel like
it's under threat
adversity uh so one is run a lot or at
least become out of breath you know a
few times a week your body will say oh
man
we had we had to outpace one of those
saber-toothed cats again gotta go to
build up the body um the other is to be
hungry either a couple of times a week
or every day you know skip a meal or two
and then your body will turn on these
sirtuins make more of that fuel nad for
the enzymes and we think
that's what's
in part responsible for the health
benefits of those uh lifestyle choices
all right one thing though that you talk
about that i found really interesting is
this notion of what may be good for you
when you're young may come back to bite
you in the ass when you're older yeah so
it's like um the whole notion of
hormesis that a little bit of bad is
actually extraordinarily good which is
exactly what you're describing now get
out of breath do all the stuff and so
when the information started pouring out
that the only thing across every known
um living organism that extends lifespan
is to eat less which you talk about in
your own book it feels like you're
saying to do it for that reason just
don't put as much stress on the system
but now i hear you saying no no what you
actually want to do is stress the system
won't that stress
of i just ran from a lion a [__]
starving won't that begin to stack up
and become problematic
well actually if you step on a snail
it's going to die so
there's certain amounts of stress that
that you don't want to do but what you
want to do is get the body to fear
adversity in the future but not enough
to cause lasting damage or the
unspooling of the dna that'll lead to
disease and eventually death so you you
don't want to overdo it you want to be a
little bit puffed you want to be a
little bit hungry but of course
starvation malnutrition is not going to
make you live longer so it's a fine line
and what we've learned from many animal
studies and increasing numbers of
clinical trials in humans is that you
want to pulse it let the body recover
not constant we used to make animals go
hungry all their lives and it worked but
it actually works better if you let them
recover and i think that's that's the
secret then let's really dive into that
so i'm guessing you're talking about
where um animals were denied something
like 20 to 30 of their caloric intake
for very long periods of time is
extending their life by what like 30 or
something um
so super interesting but you're saying
that if their caloric intake over a long
period of time is roughly the same of an
animal that's just allowed to eat until
it's satiated that if it's done in a
pulse pattern of hunger and and almost
over feed
they actually have the same benefits as
the animal that has a chronic deficit of
calories
all right well let's be clear nobody
knows what the perfect diet is even when
it comes to fasting it's all
largely based on
rodent studies so what i can tell you
about the rodent studies which i'm very
familiar with
is that if you take a rodent and reduce
its calories by 25
for its whole life
it will live longer 30
but it'll be really miserable and
aggressive uh and that's true for us as
well i've tried calorie restriction for
about a week and i gave up i was pretty
angry but what we discovered
my colleagues um discovered is that
if you it's not just what you eat it's
when you eat that's important and what's
been found is that if as long as you
have that period of hunger
um in a mouse so you can feed them every
other day
then they can gorge themselves as much
as they want and they do they eat about
of what a mouse having free access to
food would eat
but they
they have the same longevity benefit as
a mouse that's always been hungry and if
that's true what that means is for us is
that we can enjoy life as long as we
have that period of hunger once a day or
maybe twice a week and i believe the
only reason we age
you know we could live for a thousand
years otherwise the only reason we age
is that our repair systems
become complacent
you mentioned that what what is
beneficial for you when you're young
come back to bite you when you're old
what we think is that these repair
systems are very good when we're young
so the idea is it's called antagonistic
pleiotropy and i think it's right and
that is that we evolved to stay healthy
and alive and fit till we're 40
and then
the forces of natural selection decline
after that because we've
essentially bred
we've often had children
but we don't need to stick around beyond
that and building a body that will last
a thousand years is pointless at that
you know so most species only live as
long as they need to to reproduce and
then a little bit more
if you're a mouse that could die within
two years they only build a body that
lasts two years if you're a whale that
has no predators you can live for a
couple of hundred years that makes more
sense
why why does the whale live for a couple
hundred years like i would say it's
pretty safe to say certainly at some
point in our past we became a pretty
clear apex predator it's not that things
couldn't take us out but i mean by and
large obviously look at how far we've
come they didn't so why
would we only live to 40 is it that
whales continue to breed and be
useful in that sense
so that's really super interesting very
few people talk about this
the reason is that we were not at the
apex of the food chain until recently
but in a world where we typically would
die from starvation or from war a lot of
men didn't make it to 40 because of that
we were at the middle of the food chain
only now we we actually barely have a
chance of dying
before 70 or 80 unless we're unlucky
give us another 5 million years of
evolution we could evolve 200 year life
spans that's what should happen if
evolution continues
a whale has been at the apex for about
30 million years and they've been
allowed to evolve those long lifespans
we are just like them we share most of
their genes they're warm-blooded they
produce milk they're conscious they're
basically us in the sea so anyone who
says we've reached our maximum limit
doesn't know what they're talking about
talk to me about this notion of
resetting the biological clock how do we
do that what's the mechanism and
so obviously going hungry occasionally
exercise is going to help but i know
that you have a regiment that i'll
lovingly call a regiment of drugs or
precursors to things
that we can take
what can we do to reset that biological
clock
well there are different levels to
resetting aging there are three levels
that we know of the first is pretty easy
to reset or to to manipulate these are
the proteins that turn
genes on and off very quickly we call
them transcription factors and they they
basically read a gene and make a protein
that's what they do
that's level one that's easy go a little
bit hungry
that'll change level two is a little bit
harder the level two is not just
changing which genes are quickly turned
on and off but actually
silencing genes for for a long time and
this is where my enzymes that we work on
the sirtuins come into play
let's go back to the pacman they clip
off acetyls off these packing proteins
you spool up the hose and it becomes
becomes locked in that gene gets
silenced for a long time so to do that
you can exercise you can diet but you
also i think you need a little bit of
help as well
what gets really interesting and this is
something
most scientists don't even know about
yet is level three the deep layer of
aging
there's actually a dna clock that tells
our bodies how old we are we i could
take your blood and read it
and i could tell you roughly when you're
gonna die
what yeah we can do that what are you
looking for we're looking for chemical
groups that get added and subtracted to
our dna
the long string in the cell
you get chemical modifications in
predictable ways as you get older
starting from conception so even in the
womb even as a kid even as a teenager
you're aging based on this clock that
goes up linearly and where you fit on
that line
it's very accurate that tells you your
biological age but how do you know when
the person is going to die is that just
based on straight lines is it actuarial
tables though the human average human
lifespan is 86 and is that what you mean
or is there could you see something
specific in my line that would say
you're headed for 68 sorry
no it's not not specific but what it's
based on is machine learning based on
thousands of people's um code of
methylation on the genome and comparing
that to their health and their date of
death oh [__] that's so interesting so
if you were to take my blood right now
what would you look for exactly we would
read the methylation the kemp these are
chemicals hydrogen and oxygen bound to
the dna chemically physically bound
and those accumulate as you get older in
very predictable ways in fact they're so
predictable that we can use the same
clock
to measure the dog's age and a human's
age whoa
all based on methylation right okay what
causes methylation
well there are two classes of enzymes
the ones that add the methyl chemicals
and those that subtract it okay
how do i take a boatload of ones that
subtract it ah that's what we're working
on
now here's the key level two aging reset
which we can do by some of the things
that i'm doing in my life yeah probably
you are too
those aren't permanent changes you can't
just do that and expect that
take take one treatment and you go on
living for another 10 years okay because
level 2 isn't as permanent it's somewhat
permanent than level one
but level three is truly permanent it
you could reset yourself ten years
and then
go back and then wait another ten years
and potentially reset the clock again if
you know how to do that and we're just
starting to figure out how to do that
okay
so level one diet exercise cool got it
level two
uh metformin you taking metformin right
okay so
i've talked about this on the show
before but explain what is metformin why
is it prescribed to diabetics and now
why is a seemingly rash of non-diabetic
people taking it
yeah so there are three main pathways
that regulate aging in animals and
probably in ourselves
there are the sirtuins that i've talked
about a lot today
there's one called mtor which responds
to how much amino acids or how many
amino acids are in your body it will
hunker down and protect the body the
fewer amino acids it has access to okay
okay then the third is called ampk and
this is the energy sensor when your body
has low levels of energy
it will allow the body to hunker down
and protect itself from diseases but why
ampk is worth mentioning is
this is one of the targets as we call it
of the drug metformin metformin will
activate this ampk pathway and make the
body think that it's hungry when often
it's not and also keep your blood sugar
levels
more steady why would i uh hungry at a
cellular level or i actually experience
hunger at a certain level okay but it
also has an interesting side effect is
from for a lot of people myself included
it's a bit harsh on the stomach so it
also reduces my appetite but what's
great about metformin is that it's been
in millions of people for a few decades
so we know the side effects they're
relatively i'm sorry really fast so
metformin is creating at a cellular
level the sense that i'm hungry and
you're saying that from a hormesis
perspective of a little bit of bad it's
like stressing the system and that's why
we think it works it is it's exactly
doing that and so that it actually helps
the body respond in a way to boost the
energy supply
so one thing it does that's that's
undeniable is it boosts the level
the numbers of mitochondria it actually
creates additional mitochondria so your
cells are getting more efficient or more
able to generate energy
right over the long run but in the short
run what it does is it actually poisons
part of the mitochondria
so it's it's a little bit of poison that
leads to benefits down the line
what part is poisoned
uh it's called complex one so that there
are protons that are
in one part of the area of the
mitochondria in a in a membrane region
and you the cell builds up protons it
becomes really acidic in that region but
they the cell wants to release them
so what they do is they put little pores
in between the membranes so they can
leak from the high concentrated zone to
the low concentration in the middle
and as they pass through that pore
it spins the pore around and that
spinning physical spinning of that
protein will generate chemical energy
called atp
that's how atp is created and without
atp we're dead in about 10 seconds yeah
okay
that's crazy interesting uh and you're
saying sorry to go back to the poison
the poison is elevating those levels
which is causing more to go it's
actually decreasing atp in the short run
so the cell says man i haven't got
enough chemical energy in atp so that's
what forces it to create more
mitochondria right so that's the
poisoning part it is so the increased
number of mitochondria is in response to
the slight poisoning exactly but there
are two other important points the cells
in our body also
think that they need to become more
sensitive to insulin yeah which keeps
our glucose and sugar levels more steady
okay yeah that's key because that's what
helps the diabetes type 2 diabetics
recover
and you know prevents the disease from
getting worse yes the second is that
it's just been discovered in humans that
if you take metformin
a lot of it and exercise it can blunt
the effects of exercise on building
mitochondria
what we think is going on is that
you don't want to always have metformin
in your system or your body won't have a
chance to recover from that slight
poison
i'm not going to prescribe anything i'm
not a doctor but we think
it's best better to take metformin on
days that you're not exercising and
recovering
and pulse it again so you've got
metformin exercise metformin exercise
right i know you're not prescribing
anything
but
uh
how many days are you taking it how many
days are you not how often are you
exercising how often are you not
um i actually spent a lot of my 30s and
40s not exercising at all it's crazy
right someone like me
but i've become better at it now that
i'm you know i was approaching 50 now
i'm 50. uh so i spend about four hours
in the gym on the weekend with my son
benjamin dude like two hours a day
no four hours straight but it's not all
exercise okay so it's an hour with my
trainer sean who does mostly a
combination of weights and stretching
um
some free weights some machines
then it's another hour on my own with my
son we do some treadmill some more
stretching and essentially just muck
around doing stuff that's fun for him
and then we also then we do
some
some yoga downstairs in the gym a little
bit of relaxation but the best fun part
that i really love is at the end we do a
sauna
hot tub cold bath sauna hot tub cold
bath for about an hour
and i feel fantastic talk to me about
that so in your book you go into cold
exposure you said you moved to boston it
sucked coming from australia and you
bundled up and now you wish you hadn't
um why cold exposure is cold and hot
both necessary what's the difference
well there are a few reasons one is the
high level view is that anything that
stresses your body puts it into a state
of shock is good in the long run but a
little bit of perceived adversity being
a little bit too hot a little bit too
cold and especially the gradient between
those two which is why we jump from one
to the other the next point is that i've
looked at the literature and at first
when uh i was prompted by my publisher
to look into this scientifically they
said you know what about this
cryotherapy what do you think and a
couple of years ago i had no idea that
this was real it sounded like [__]
to me
but i looked into it and there were
there are two important things one is
cryotherapy or cold
exposure we'll build up what's called
brown fat
we didn't know brown fat existed in
humans until about five years ago
typically it's across your back and in
other reasons you can see with a pet
scan but otherwise it's pretty invisible
just looks like fat
but brown fat is particularly healthy
because it it has a lot of mitochondria
and we think it also secretes little
proteins that tell the rest of the body
to be healthy
in what way to be healthy
we're not sure yet we're not sure it's
interesting oh man i want the answer to
that question but it certainly revs up
your metabolism and will burn energy if
you're looking to stay lean
having a bit of brown fat is all good so
my my friend ray cronus and i have
written on this and andrew bremer and at
the nih we call it the metabolic winter
hypothesis and essentially it's saying
that in our lifestyles these days we're
always warm i'm wearing this jacket we
sleep with the covers on we turn up the
heat we never get exposed to coal unless
we force ourselves to
and we think that that's possibly
largely responsible if not you know
maybe partly perhaps largely
responsible for the diabetic
problem we have
what okay so
if if you're cold at night you're going
to burn a lot more energy staying
warm yes turn on your brown fat
now that's going to keep people lean if
we bundle up
and and we eat the kind of diets that
that we see in the supermarket that's
going to be doubly bad for our bodies
yeah we're warm we're not losing energy
and we're eating a lot more
yeah this is this stuff is so
interesting okay so
what's your advisor i whatever you're
about to tell me no i'm going to do it
so like
how frequently do i want to be doing it
is it every day what's that look like
well what i do is because i'm busy and i
don't have a sauna or a cold tub at home
i subject myself to this stuff um for
about an hour on sundays
and what i do is i spend about 15
minutes at 150 degrees
fahrenheit well that's
reasonably intense but you get used to
it
then we go into the steam room
um you know we're sitting there chatting
it's great uh temperatures lower in the
steam room because the humidity is
saturated
the roof's dripping on you hot water
uh but that that i i don't know if the
steam helps but i certainly love the
feeling of being in there and my skin
starts to be healthier because of course
it's cleaning itself out
and then the final thing i do is hot tub
pretty hot hot water and then and then i
go and dunk
below the water a couple of times in
water that's less than four degrees
celsius
so that that's so cold that it takes
your breath away yeah yeah but it's
great
interesting was there anything else on
level three that we should know about
yes
so work that we've done recently uh just
in the last year is finding ways to
tweak the cells and the tissues of of
mice at least
to reset the clock
we've been working for 10 years as i
said accelerating the clock we can drive
that hand of the clock forwards now we
we cut the dna of the animal let it heal
and in doing so we distract those
proteins from where they come from so
we're
disturbing this survival circuit so much
that we disrupt the spooling of the dna
and what we got was an old mouse by
every account based on histology which
is looking at the tissues based on their
physiology they got gray they got
arthritis they got heart disease even
and when we look at the molecular clock
that uh methylation clock they were 50
percent older communications they had
more like clumps everywhere
uh those methyl groups were added to the
dna
right right okay so we had given them
heart disease and alzheimer's or
dementia we'd given them all these
diseases but by measuring the clock what
we'd actually done is give them aging
but that that was the first step that
took 10 years the last year we've been
asking how do you get the hands to go
backwards that's a lot harder but we
were fortunate that
the 2012 nobel prize was one for the
ability to reverse that clock in cells
it's called uh it was the prize awarded
to shinya yamanaka a japanese fellow
very smart guy and he found
at least four genes that when you put
into say skin cells of an adult if you
gave me your skin cells i could go back
to laven basically clone you i could
take your cells make a stem cell pool
and i could grow you into a new little
liver or a new little kidney that's all
easy not easy but it's doable it's
doable um
what that tells us is that those four
yamanaka genes
can reset age if i can take someone
who's in like you who's in their early
40s and make a new you as we've done now
for many species
dogs cats sheep
monkeys
those animals we can reset the clock
hundred percent and those animals
actually live a normal lifespan that
tells us that the instructions to be
young are still in the cell somewhere
as though there's a backup hard drive
that tells the epigenome those spools
had to go back to be young again and get
those methyl groups back to being young
again not up here but back there but
don't strip them off too far to be a
stem cell or i'll basically turn you
into the world's giant tumor yeah
okay so one why do i become a tumor
because a tumor is a cell that doesn't
know to stop right so what is it that
you're breaking in that process that
that makes it
so um dysfunctional yeah so in terms of
the clock let's just start with that
shiny yamanaka wound the clock so far
back it went back to zero back to
midnight that we do not want to do
because the cells lose their identity
and that's the last thing we want to do
we don't want to go back to us because
it's dangerous to have a pluripotent
stem cell in the wrong place in the body
of course it'll grow it won't stop
growing but why doesn't why why does it
become a tumor why doesn't it become a
liver or a lung like i would get the
problem of having a liver develop in my
brain but i'm just saying like why does
it become a tumor cell instead of an
actual functioning liver
uh well so when you go back far enough
and it loses its identity
it will just multiply
into a mass without cellular identity so
there's something else going on that
stops it from figuring itself out right
so in the lab if we take a pluripotent
stem cell and we want to make a liver
cell or a neuron
a nerve cell we give it a bunch of
chemical signals in what we call the
niche and when one of these cells lands
in a niche around
those old cells they'll use that stem
cell to rebuild tissue but imagine if we
could reset the clock not all the way
back to a stem cell but just partial
reset the clock so
so that you could go back to being 20
again right that's what we're able to do
in some tissues in the mouse right now
you do it on mass
when it's cell by cell dna strand by dna
strand like
how the hell do you get this to take
effect
through a whole joint let alone the
whole body
yeah right now the way we do it is
we inject a virus called an aav and this
virus will target certain tissues and
deliver the genes to most of the cells
in that tissue
for example we are treating aging of the
eye in mice so we can take an old mouse
we deliver a virus the av into the eye
tiny little prick
it's the same virus that that's used to
correct genetic deficiencies in the eye
right now fda approved drugs so this
isn't science fiction this is out there
in in the world right now
we give it give it to the old mice we
give them an answer about it antibiotic
called doxycycline
okay same thing you might take if you
got lyme disease
and that turns on these reprogramming
factors we don't use all four of the
factors oskm they're called because one
of them
causes cancer
the m we leave off the m we put osnk
into the eye turn it on leave it for a
few weeks
measure what happens to the eye and
those mice can see again like they were
young
so we've tested three different types of
damaged damage to the eye the first one
we did was a hail mary so that a lab
near ours across the road works on
rejuvenating the spine and the optic
nerve which is crazy yeah because we
know as soon as you're
you know a couple of months old you're
not going to regrow a spine it's one of
the first parts of the body that ages in
fact
but jellyfish can regrow axolotls can
regrow an arm we lose that ability when
we're very very young so we the question
was if we turn the clock back a lot
without osk genes will those nerve cells
be young enough to regrow back to the
brain if we damage them and that was the
experiment they pinched the back of the
optic nerve so that the nerves were
defective and they started to die back
towards the brain of course the mice
lost their vision we then turned on our
reprogramming factors we now see that
the nerves get young again
wind the clock back and they regrow back
to the brain
we could give ourselves the healing
ability that we only had when we were
embryos
and you start to think about what could
this lead to if we can do this safely of
course safe is the important word across
the body imagine one day you could have
every cell in your body able to be
rejuvenated like that you cut yourself
you break a bone
you lose your your mind you have a
dementia you take a course of
doxycycline for a few weeks and then
stop switch it off again and you
you heal
if you turn it on at high levels there's
a lab in spain that has shown that you
can get small tumors in some animals in
the kidney so we've been very careful to
not just blast the cell with these
factors permanently
we've titrated or we say brought the
levels down to very low levels and
switch it off when we don't need it but
we have given mice
uh this virus throughout their body we
inject it into a vein and we turn it on
we've left it on now expecting the mice
to die
a year later they're perfectly fine wow
so it appears to be safe but of course
there's a lot more work to do i'm a
scientist and i'm developing drugs i
have to be very aware of the dangers
sure please nobody go out and try this
at home at all until we know more but
the eye is a good testing zone because
it's it's protected and if there's a
problem it's you know it's shielded from
the rest of the body it won't go too far
but everything we know now is that it
seems to be very safe at least in the
eye wow this is crazy so that is
is there an element of getting better
improvement human performance or
anything that um you can tease us with
well we we've actually uh published
results
that in mice if you give them
an nad booster molecule that will turn
on these pac-man enzymes called the
sirtuins
those mice when they're old can now run
50 further in fact some of our old mice
ran so far that the treadmill stopped
because mice are not supposed to run
more than three kilometers we haven't
talked about nad yet tell me what nad is
what are the precursors how do i
supplement for it uh so there are a few
on the market i i don't endorse or sell
anything just by the way even if you see
me on line that's not me
so that said there are there's one
called nr
which is stan which stands for
nicotinamide riboside
which is a very early precursor to
making nad in the body there's an
intermediate from that called nmn
not to be confused with m ms please
don't do that that's not healthy
and then the cell turns nmn into nad
and you can take
all three actually and or each one of
those three and raise nad levels in
animals and now we're doing myself and
many others are doing human studies and
we've seen that
nr and in my case nmn does raise the
energy levels of older people and and
young people alike up to levels that we
think you could rarely achieve even with
uh being a marathon runner that's crazy
so just to bring this home for people
talk to me about your dad and his uh n
of one experimentation with nmn yeah
so my father has been on the same
regiment as me resveratrol for over a
decade the red wine molecule
he's been on metformin longer than me
because he had he was a borderline
diabetic type 2 diabetic
and he's also on a man now
and he seems to be doing great he's now
80. when he was in his 70s he was he was
slowing down his he was starting to say
the same things twice
you know typical 70 year old
he's doing great now he's 80 he's got a
new lease on life he started a new
career down in sydney he's hiking at the
world right now he's traveling around
america driving his elderly friend uh
around his friend unfortunately ended up
going to the hospital the last few days
so my father is taking care of his
friends who he's seeing
on the decline and he's if anything
improving every year
i'd love to hear more about resveratrol
which is something that i've completely
written off until i started researching
you um it seemed for a red hot minute
like it was real and then it seemed to
completely die and i know that you got
sort of caught in the middle of some of
this stuff
so
where has all the forget like what pop
culture thinks of it like what's the
reality of it yeah so resveratrol was a
proof of concept molecule back in 2003
the first of its kind that could mimic
caloric restriction make mice healthy on
a high fat western diet and it was it
was a great proof of something that we
were trying to figure out and it led to
drugs that went into humans that looked
really promising
i got embroiled in a scientific and a a
corporate war
song in the case of pfizer they put out
a scientific paper that said
essentially everything that david has
said is wrong
okay and then that was a great headline
harvard scientists started companies is
wrong okay and you know and then i spent
about a week in bed saying [__] the
world
you know why am i doing this why am i
working so hard for society if they
don't care but i worked my way out of
bed i thought let's dig deep and see if
they're right or if we're right
and so for another three years we really
worked hard in my lab at harvard to test
whether we were right so the question
was
with this pac-man that spools the dna
does resveratrol work on it or is it
working on something else
and that to scientists is really
important because if it's not working on
this
all the drugs that we're trying to work
on this are probably working
um
the wrong way that we thought
to cut a long story short what we found
and published in the journal science
which is one of the top you can do
and i say that because it's
validated science
is that we show that resveratrol does
bind to the pacman and it is responsible
for this and we now have new information
that we haven't published but i'll tell
your audience about it we've made a
mouse that is resistant to activation of
the pacman
we can tweak the enzyme just in one
amino acid in that protein out of about
a thousand
that blocks this movement activation
it's normally chewing like this
but if we add resveratrol to a normal
mouse it'll do that to our mutant mouse
it's this and which is better
the rapid munching rapid munching's
better okay because the rapid was we
think was responsible for the health
benefits and the longevity so what
you're showing is by slowing it down you
cause real problems and thusly if you
have resveratrol on there and get it
munching really fast that you've done
something positive right and our mutant
mouse should be resistant to the
benefits of resveratrol if we're right
but if pfizer is right then resveratrol
should still provide benefits even
though this enzyme because it's working
on some other some other way got it so
the mouse that could not be sped up the
mutant mouse does not live longer when
given resveratrol on its high fat diet
interesting so that will be the the
punctuation mark the fu we will ride
but but interestingly the world has
moved on
right well i'm left to clean up the
pieces right
yeah so and when you say the world has
moved on you're talking about people
like me who just assumed that it was
garbage and that it's not real and right
okay so um you've said that the only
supplement you take is vitamin d um so
how are you getting resveratrol in the
system is it a drug do you have to have
it prescribed
uh well i'm taking resveratrol i have um
and would we call that a supplement sure
and it's commercially available
uh it is if it's a legitimate seller and
it's 98 plus percent pure
it seems to be
similar to what i take
and ballpark how much do you take
um i take a teaspoon into my yogurt
that's probably close to a gram every
day every day yeah okay uh resveratrol
roughly a gram
are you taking nmm or is nmn or is that
just your dad uh both of us okay and
then um metformin
right those three anything else those
are the main things that i think are
helpful and i've been monitoring my
blood by chemistry so i and you said you
took an mri of your heart right which i
love
what are things that we should be
testing assume for a second i'm willing
to go all the way do any crazy test to
know if what i'm doing is working um
what would you recommend
well i avoid x-rays and ct scans unless
i have to sure right
if your doctor says go for it please
don't refuse that but otherwise don't do
it for fun don't do it because you're
curious uh because those ct scans will
break your dna and when we break the
mouse's dna it's a its age goes up by 50
percent so whoa right so avoid dna
breaks as much as possible
what i do is i take a blood test from a
company called inside tracker which in
full disclosure i invested in years ago
and they look at about 30 parameters in
your blood and give you feedback it's
doctor supervised so it's it's legit and
it's based on a lot of science
and that at least gives you some
feedback
about your body about what's actually
happening if you change your lifestyle
or you take a supplement or even a new
drug for that matter so you've got to
have you've got to be monitoring because
you don't you don't want to fly blind
you don't know if for you you're doing
harm or doing good
so do do a blood test at least go to
your doctor and have a blood test for
for a good goodness sake
you could have your genome sequenced or
do something that looks at the the
variance in your genome for relatively
little cost i think it's 99 now
i gave a test of that kind to my whole
family as christmas present
and what we've learned is that some of
our members lab members are not lab
members family members have variants
that predict longevity some don't some
have mutations in their genome that are
a little bit scary
um down the line you could get your dna
methylation age determined the true
what's called the horvath clock some
people measure their telomere lengths
um
did you have a biopsy to do that or can
you do it from blood blood blood test is
fine
yeah so interesting
all right where can people learn more
about you
uh well so the main site is
lifespanbook.com that's where you can
sign up for the newsletter and uh buy a
copy of the book if you're interested i
highly encourage it well thanks i'm also
um now on social media so i have a
twitter account i try to talk about the
science about new findings about things
that i've just learned and stuff like
this that they might want to tune into
so my twitter account is david a
sinclair
and i have instagram where i send out
some you know little fun to do is not to
do this kind of thing and that's david
sinclair phd okay
what's the impact that you want to have
on the world
well that's easy since i was four years
old i've wanted to figure out why we die
so fast
and you know in my view i think it's
cruel to have a sentient being that
knows it's going to die in such a short
time frame
80 years is nothing it goes by in a
blink of an eye even a thousand years
will go by in a blink it's only 20 times
what i've lived
so i want to be able to leave a mark on
the planet i'm hoping to have moved the
needle somewhat on the course of human
history
i think we've we've come further than i
thought we would in my whole lifetime
and this i've still got a few years left
to try and make what i'm talking about
come true i certainly hope so if you
were going to have people make one
change that would have the biggest
impact on their health what change would
you have them make
well so having read tens of thousands of
papers and done this for now 30 years
and talked to people and i know what's
on the cutting edge
the simplest thing you can do that would
have the biggest bang for the buck
is be a little bit hungry don't eat but
that's not to say be
nourished
don't don't starve yourself
right there are a lot of teenage teenage
girls particularly who don't eat enough
so i'm not saying that at all you've got
to have a minimum nutrition
but for those of us myself included who
likes to eat
those of us who don't mind a bit of
dessert try to skip a meal i skip
breakfast besides that bit of yogurt
often i'm too busy to eat eat a lunch
at dinner i eat a normal meal i don't
gorge myself because
that'll trigger all these defensive
pathways that'll rebuild the body or at
least keep it pristine until we have
such things as the level three reversal
which we're now working on that's
amazing david thank you so much for
being here that's incredible and
guys read the book dive in if you're
like me and you want to live forever i'm
telling you this guy is at the tip of a
very exciting sphere so check them out
if you haven't already be sure to
subscribe and until next time my friends
be legendary take care
my man that was [__] awesome
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential
you